Ask a lot of writers and they'll tell
you that the key to creating good
narrative is
>> conflict.
>> I can't do this.
>> You don't have to I don't need I know
what I need to know.
>> The characters need a desire to pursue
and they need obstacles in their path to
overcome in order to get that desire.
It's pretty commonly understood that
this is just the basics of good
storytelling. And in some ways, I think
they're kind of right because a lot of
times that's what we want. We want
drama. We want conflict.
We want high stakes to make things
interesting.
But if you're constantly being bombarded
by conflict in your real life or the
other media you're consuming, it might
be nice to spend some time with a story
that
takes a step back from highstakes
conflict as the primary narrative
driving force.
>> How's life doing?
>> Uh, you know, no complaints. You
>> plain old. By the standards of
conventional narrative, nothing really
happens in Patterson. A movie about a
bus driver and poet. He drives a bus. He
writes poems. He walks his dog. He hangs
out with his partner who does a bunch of
crafts and art. Plenty of stuff is
actually happening, but it's not the
kind of stuff we usually watch a movie
to see a character do. Ultimately, the
movie's fully aware of this. Sometimes
it's even teasing you with the idea that
something is about to happen. Nobody
move.
>> And then it kind of never really does.
You could call this an anti- drama. In
traditional narrative structure for a
film, we set up the world of the
character's everyday life and then
there's an inciting incident, a moment
where something happens that calls the
character to the big adventure that will
be most of the story. But in Patterson,
it's like the inciting incident never
arrives. Almost the entire movie kind of
feels like the setup for another film.
This might sound frustrating or boring
to you if that's not what you want. But
if you know what you're getting into and
you're in the mood for it, the
anti-drama approach can provide a unique
break from the highstakes drama and
excitement that are built into like 98%
of our stories. Patterson is a movie
where nobody's going to be selling meth,
dying, or crashing out. And it's one of
my personal go-to comfort films.
Ever since I first watched Apocalypse
Now as a teenager, and it completely
changed my perception of war, I've loved
movies that take you straight into the
heart of darkness. You know, the movies
that grapple with some of the most
difficult and challenging subject matter
that we face as humans in life. I mean,
one of my favorites and I think one of
the best and most relevant films of the
last decade is The Zone of Interest. And
movies like this have the potential to
offer us new perspectives. They can even
be a wake-up call challenging us to
examine ourselves or the world around
us. But there can also be an attitude
that treats these kinds of movies, which
deal with difficult themes, as
inherently more artistically credible.
It kind of discredits movies that are
more light-hearted or silly or which
exist mostly to bring us joy. But these
movies are some of the most beloved, the
ones we watch countless times and which
can hold a very special place in our
lives. So, let's talk about the
feel-good or the comfort film. What is
it? Well, it's kind of tricky to talk
about because it's a pretty subjective
category. It's going to be different
things to different people. Whatever it
is, let's explore what makes these films
work. the attributes they share. And
along the way, I'm going to talk about
movies that bring me joy, with a special
focus on ones that I think have just as
much artistic intention and craft as
anything that deals with more serious
issues or subject matter. If you're
looking for a more light-hearted movie
to watch, I think you'll find at least
one of these will be perfect for you.
Maybe I shouldn't have to do this, but I
kind of feel the need to defend the
feelood film. Reflexively, sometimes we
can write this off as escapism. The
accusation being that people just use
entertainment to distract themselves
from very real problems in their own
lives or in the world. I'm not
advocating for using movies as a sandbox
that you can stick your head into. It's
important to stay informed. But I think
we have to be attentive to this balance.
There's a point at which we can become
trapped in chronic nervous system
distress because of the media we're
consuming. Our brains are hardwired to
scan our environment for potential
dangers or problems. The media you
consume can then end up releasing
cortisol, raising your blood pressure,
elevating your heart rate, inducing
stress. And when we have access to this
media in our pockets all the time, it
means that places in our lives that may
have typically been felt as a safe haven
in the past, like maybe our living room
or our bedroom, are now often the places
where we're really intensely and
intimately consuming some of the most
distressing media that we ever consume.
It's not even that the negativity we're
consuming is necessarily
sensationalized, although it often is.
You could just be consuming the straight
facts about bad things that are
happening in the world. But there's
enough of those things that you could
spend all day every day doing just that.
And doing that would trap you in such a
place of physical nervous system
exhaustion that it would destroy your
ability to actually take any action
towards improving or helping to fix any
of those problems. If you find yourself
in that place, you might need a break or
a rest. And there's lots of ways you
could do this. You could go for a walk.
You could meditate. You could hang out
with friends. But this is a movie
channel, so I'm going to talk about one
of my favorite ways of doing that, which
is putting on a feel-good or comfort
film. In the same way negative media can
have an effect on our nervous system,
feel-good movies can as well. Almost
acting as a kind of guided meditation,
creating a space where we're in a
familiar environment, looking at
beautiful images that bring us joy and
giving us a contained period of time
within which we can hopefully relax. So,
let's get into it.
Maybe the most obvious in this category
is the goofy comedy. Not only is the
point to make you laugh, but it's to
make you laugh not with heavy-hitting
satire or social commentary, but just
silliness and ridiculousness, at least
on his face. For me, nobody does this
better than the Cohen brothers.
>> Willie doesn't care about anything. He's
a nihilist.
>> Oh, that must be exhausting.
>> I like the Big Labowski, especially for
a few reasons. first because it's
basically a parody of neo- noir films.
So, it scratches a certain cinnaphile
itch for me. But it's also intricately
written in this extremely
self-referential way.
>> This will not stand. This aggression
against Kuwait.
>> This will not stand. You know, this
aggression will not stand, man.
>> Which rewards multiple viewings.
Something that plays a big role in
creating a comfort film. Part of what
brings us comfort when we watch a film
is familiarity. This means any movie
that you've watched a bunch of times for
whatever reason has a higher potential
of becoming a comfort film. Even if it's
not traditionally a feel-good kind of
movie. But this also means that movies
that have high rewatchability are more
likely to become comfortable films.
There's something soothing to us about
predictability, which is why sometimes
very conventional story structure or TV
shows that use the same format for every
episode often end up acting as a type of
comfort media. What I love is a movie
that somehow strikes this magical
balance where the more you watch it, the
more familiar you become, but where
there's also enough layers that by the
fifth watch, you're still discovering
something new.
>> This is a very complicated case mod. you
know, a lot of ins, a lot of outs, a lot
of what have you.
>> And that's what the big Labowski is for
me.
Another thing that creates this
comfortable familiarity is nostalgia.
Sometimes we have nostalgia for the film
itself. If it's one we've been watching
since our childhood, there's so many
great animated films I could name in
this category, for classic Disney
animation. I have a particular love for
101 Dalmatians. But obviously for many
people, which movies have this familiar
nostalgia is just kind of going to be
luck of the draw. What did you happen to
watch as a kid?
>> I wish I had a million dollars.
>> Every year at Christmas growing up, my
family watched it's a Wonderful Life,
and I think it's a good movie, but
watching it also has this extra layer of
transporting me back to watching it as a
kid at one of my favorite times of year.
For me, the best comfort films from my
childhood are the ones that still feel
relevant to me now, where I'm not just
reliving the experience of watching the
movie as a kid, but actually seeing the
story from a fresh perspective as an
adult and getting something new out of
it. But sometimes the nostalgia isn't
from the memories you have attached to
the movie in your childhood. Sometimes a
newer film calls back elements of our
childhood or an earlier time in our life
that we're nostalgic for. Moonrise
Kingdom is basically this for me because
while I didn't really manage to see it
until I was almost an adult, there are
so many elements of the film that invoke
various childhood memories for me or
adventures. To paraphrase how Wes
Anderson describes the film, it's like
an adult's memory of their own childhood
fantasy. When I was a kid, I loved
playing in the woods and the idea of
setting out on an adventure on my own
was extremely compelling. And this movie
captures exactly what I remember
thinking that adventure would have been
like as a kid. Moonrise Kingdom though
for me isn't just a comfort film because
of the nostalgia. Many of Wes Anderson's
films have a comforting feeling to me.
And I think this is because many of them
are presented explicitly as stories.
It's like they're not trying to trick
you into thinking that any of what
you're watching is real. People complain
about this creating an emotional
distance, but sometimes that's good.
Sometimes a comfortable remove where
you're feeling like you're turning the
pages of a pop-up book is actually what
we want. They remind you you're inside
someone's story or a fantasy itself. And
that also reminds us of the kinds of
imaginative play that children often
engage in, but which were pretty quick
to lose room for as adults. The other
thing about Wes Anderson's films that I
find comfortable is their commitment to
beauty. There's something about these
controlled compositions, the well
orchestrated color palettes, and just
the beautiful symmetrical images in
general that create a space that feels
soothing and relaxing to my brain. So,
if we're going to talk about beauty as
an element of comfort, of course, I need
to mention Studio Gibli. All of Haya
Miyazaki's films bring me joy. But in
the interest of having this video not
just be a list of his movies, I'm
limiting myself to one movie per
director. I honestly don't really see
how anyone couldn't be delighted by some
of the most beautifully crafted works of
animation ever created. Miyazaki's
worlds are some of the most beautiful
and inventive in all of cinema, not just
animated film. And like Moonrise
Kingdom, they kind of tap into this
sense of childhood play and whimsy. But
as beautiful as they are, the real heart
of a Miyazaki film for me is not
necessarily the beauty, but the
storytelling. It's always imaginative.
It's usually hopeful and fairly gentle,
even when it's dealing with sometimes
kind of difficult, scary subject matter.
Kiki's Delivery Service holds a special
place in my heart because I think it
resonates with anyone who has kind of
set out on their own to go do some kind
of work or creative endeavor in the
world. That can be a challenging and
rewarding process, especially for a
young person. If you've ever set out
into that unfamiliar territory to do
something on your own, Kiki's Delivery
Service is a story that really
beautifully will encourage you on that
journey. And while we're on the subject
of beautiful movies, I want to mention
Babett's Feast. This is a movie about a
woman who ends up with some money and
decides to use that money to cook a
lavish meal for a bunch of ultra
religious people who don't ever indulge
in the sensual pleasures of life. It's
equal parts cheeky, funny, and just
beautiful. Sometimes a movie pulls out
all the stops to create the most
extraordinarily beautiful images
possible. But there are others that take
a slightly different approach, working
more to remind us to pay attention to
and look out for the dayto-day beauty
that exists in the world.
Our lives can be filled with all kinds
of difficult, awful, and even ugly
things. But there is almost always, I
sincerely hope for you, at least
something beautiful in your environment
right now. And we can make our lives
better and more enjoyable for absolutely
zero dollars by learning how to attune
our attention to the beautiful things
that already exist in our environment.
just a perfect day.
>> If you want a movie that's almost a
guide in how to do this, there's no
better option than Perfect Days directed
by film vendors.
This is a quiet little film about a
toilet cleaner in Tokyo that I've talked
about before.
And mostly we just watch him live out
his day-to-day life. There's not a lot
going on, but that's basically the
point.
Like the main character, the movie looks
out for the tiny details in life that
are beautiful but easy to miss. The ones
which if you pay attention to them,
you'll be rewarded internally for
noticing.
The Eye for Hidden Beauty, though, isn't
the only thing that makes Perfect Days a
great comfort film. It's also a movie
that breaks conventional narrative
structure, kind of in the same way that
Patterson does. Another way to engage
with conflict in your film is to set the
stakes very low. One of my favorite
examples of this is the delightful
Yasujiro Ozu movie Good Morning.
>> This is a movie I watched back toback
two nights in a row because I loved it
so much the first time. The basic
premise of the story is that these
parents refuse to get these two boys a
television and so they go on a strike of
silence.
When I think of Ozu, I think of these
black and white, very sincere, but kind
of austere examinations of family
dynamics. But Good Morning is Ozu at his
most playful, and it's delightful. It's
a lot of fun. And Ozu's color palettes
and compositions are an underaggled
predecessor to what Wes Anderson is
doing. So, if that kind of intricately
crafted beauty is comforting to you,
Good Morning is definitely one you'll
want to watch.
Another way to challenge conventional
narrative is to avoid conventional plot
and dialogue altogether. Then just take
the silliness dial and turn it way up.
This is actually a longstanding
tradition in film history. There's the
delightful charming antics of Charlie
Chaplan or the daring stunts of Buster
Keaton. These films relied not so much
on story and plot but on set design,
blocking and choreography for their
comedic energy. One of my favorite
characters in this tradition is Mansuru
Hulo created by the French director
Jacqu Tati. If you're just looking for
technical artistry, scale, and
complexity of set pieces, the obvious
standout choice from Tati is his
masterpiece, Playtime, which has some
incredible, hilarious, well-designed set
pieces that are unlike anything else
you'll see in any other film. But the
movie I really want to highlight here is
My Uncle.
If only for the fact that it just has
more random cute dogs than any other
movie I've ever seen. If you know of a
movie with more cute dogs in it than my
uncle, put it in the comments below. In
this movie, Hulo lives in a charming old
French town and he goes to visit his
sister who lives in this very modernist
home. And Hulo, of course, is completely
bamboozled by modern technology. His
brother-in-law insists that he's a
deadbeat and that he has to get a job
and that he's a bad influence on their
son. And a bunch of charming antics
ensue. It's basically pure chaotic
silliness, but with a weirdly intense
focus on good design. There's nothing
super important or dramatic happening
here, but I think Jacqu Tati understands
the comedic value of just putting a
bunch of dogs in a scene or having
somebody sit in a funny chair. If you
want to know what actually funny,
light-hearted postmodernism looks like,
I think this movie is a great example of
that. And if this bit from Wes
Anderson's The French Dispatch is funny
and satisfying to you, then you're going
to love this movie.
Those
are just a few of the movies that bring
me joy. There are so many others and I'm
sure you have a bunch of your own, so I
would love to hear from you. Please
mention your favorites in the comments
below.
I should admit the stuff that stares
directly into the void and the stuff I
find kind of comforting sometimes
overlaps. Twin Peaks is one of those
kinds of things. If you've never seen
Twin Peaks, I really recommend checking
it out and you can watch it right now on
Movie, my sponsor for this video. Movie
is an online handcurated streaming
cinema with movies from all around the
world. And you're going to find all
kinds of great stuff on there. Some of
it will be incredibly beautiful. Some of
it might be in this indie anti-drama
space we talked about. You might also
find the exact opposite of the comfort
film. They just released a new series
called Mussolini directed by Joe Wright.
So, if you're tired of the feel-good
stuff and want to go into the heart of
darkness, you should check that out. But
I also want to mention the Movie
Notebook. This comes out from Movie
twice a year, and it's a beautiful print
magazine. A subscription to it for a
year is 40 bucks, which I think is a
great price considering like how
beautiful these are essentially as
pieces of art.
This is the seventh edition. I have them
all. They're all beautifully designed.
So, go check that out. You can go to
movie.com/thomasflight
to check out Twin Peaks, Mussolini,
browse the curated catalog or sign up
for the movie notebook subscription.
Again, go to mubi.com/thomasflight.
And if you go to that link, you'll get
30 days for free. Thanks again to Movie
for sponsoring this video.
[Music]